the minority started developing a fairly strong
political say and their feeling was you're trying
to break up this little political concentration
of power we're getting the traumatic thing was
when I had to debate on television with this man who
had threatened the lives of major HUD officials
and debate the plan but because we understood that
you don't dictate local policy from Washington
you know to local government in Texas, we had
structured a program that basically allowed more
options without requiring a whole bunch of
things. Basically, we said, first of all, you find
housing for everybody. Then you worry about
letting people live exactly where they want to.
And those that want to should be able to move. And
those that don't want to shouldn't have to. Was
there a perception, too, that they wanted the
Allen Parkway for the expansion of the CBD? Alan
Parkway really wasn't involved in any of this. It
wasn't even an issue. I see. The issue, at least
from Washington, was how do you disperse people?
And Alan Parkway at that time was a given, and our
bottom line was there simply didn't begin to be
enough public housing. So debating, closing one
down, just simply wasn't an issue. What year was
this? This was, I believe, in 79 and 80. maybe 88 and
1. This was part of the whole federal
concept of regional fair share in housing. Yeah.
They called it the Regional Housing Mobility
Program. And those were the old days of the area
wide housing opportunity plans where you would
tell a community how many units they were going to
take and so forth. Yeah, it was an attempt to
homogenize the entire region. Or an attempt to get
the region operating as a whole. We never wound up,
though we discussed at length, the idea of doing
one of these plans. We decided that that was not in
the best interests of this particular area.
Political dynamism. Exactly, exactly. And there
were no guarantees that, in fact, you would get
this extra money. Yeah, in fact, several COGs
found themselves threatened with nonexistence
if they went ahead with such a program. That was one
of the times I felt very proud of the way we pursued
something because there was some interest
stirred up by outsiders in our doing it because
some of the small communities perceived they
might get some more money. And I went to
Washington. We developed a great many materials.
I just said, okay, here are the facts. You know,
we're not going to suggest how you decide this, but
here are the pros, here are the cons, here's the way
it would work. And we had really quite a large
public debate. We had several different public
hearings and public meetings where we had
officials from HUD down and just answered
questions. And all of this took place well before
any kind of a decision needed to be made. And the
final decision was that this was not something to
pursue at this time. At any rate, what it- There was
no mandate for HUD to do it. No, they would have
liked to, but they They talked about a mandate, and
then for all practical purposes, HUD went away as
far as regional councils were concerned. When
they stopped giving 701 money, that was sort of the
end of it. Nor took you long nor long. Exactly. In my
mind, that was then the beginning of the growth of
regional councils in terms of HGAC, which is sort
of the only one I can speak to. Because when there
was no longer federal money that suggested you do
this program or that program, the programs then
had to be structured by what the board was willing
to put local money in. And so then the local money
started going to address things that they saw as
problems, particularly problems that were
interjurisdictional.
I think the high point of the evolution of this was
the solid waste, the regional solid waste plan
that we did. One of our county judges came to the
board one day, and he said, we have a real problem in
solid waste. City of Houston's contract is trying
to put a landfill in our community. We don't have a
place to put our own garbage daily. I am inundated
by salesmen of different technologies, and I
don't even know how to evaluate those
technologies. I have a feeling waste to energy
might be a good idea. I don't even know how to begin
to go about it, evaluating whether it's a good
idea. HGAC, you need to do something. It took us
probably close to a year working with a committee
of the board, all elected officials, to decide
what would be the appropriate thing to do. And all
along, as I'd work with this subcommittee, I would
say, well, we need to do this plan. Uh-uh, we don't
want a plan. Doris, forget about a plan. We don't
want a plan. Well, then I got smarter. We all learn
over the years. And I said, what we need is an action
guide. We need an action guide for solid waste so
that I'd say, now, do you think we ought to survey
all the communities and do some research and
figure out what the problems are in the different
parts of the region? Definitely. I said, and you do
want to know what technologies are available and
what the advantages and disadvantages of each
are. Definitely want that. And then you kind of
want us to do some forecasts, analyze what the
problems are now versus what they're likely to be
and when. Oh, definitely. And I think you want us to
make some recommendations as to actions that need
to be taken. I said, yeah, they want to. I said,
well, that sounds like an action guide to me. And so
the board then. Pretty sneaky. Well, you know,
hey. You got to do what you got to do. If you have one
bad word, it may not be the concept that's bad. It
may be the word. And that's what it turned out to be.
They liked everything about it, but they didn't
want to call it a plan. Then we went to individual
governments. We wrote all of the governments a
letter asking if they would be willing to put up a
donation, voluntary contribution towards this
plan. We gathered, I think, 35 or 40,000 dollars.
And the council of governments added another, it
wound up being about another $100,000 in order to
develop this plan. Because it was something that
the governments, they perceived that they needed
this. Sure. Those that had the garbage had nowhere
to put it. Those that didn't have it were receiving
it. They didn't know what the future would hold.
And it's the first time I would probably say that I
was involved in a planning process where there was
consistent interest on the part of elected
officials. Several times when I gave
presentations on the status of the planning
program, and you couldn't avoid giving technical
presentations showing them how we developed
these little computer programs that would
project landfill needs by acre and so forth. Never
have I seen elected officials be interested in a
technical. I was able to maintain their interest
with presentations of technical material I
wouldn't even present to them. But there was a
sense that they should be part of this all the way
through. When we finished, we took some brave
stands. We said urban areas should not have
landfills. The board went on record as saying that
they favored waste to energy as the best way of
taking care of solid waste. During the course of
the study, the state legislature passed then
House Bill 1719, which called for local and
regional planning in solid waste management. The
legislature then never funded the legislation,
but it allowed, it put a little teeth into a plan
because it allowed it to go through an approval
process, which once approved, local actions
would have to conform to it. Oh, yeah. The State
Department of Health, of course, couldn't get
around to writing regulations. And as long as we
were doing this plan and getting a lot of support
locally, we decided, well, it ought to be approved
at the state. So we got together a committee from
several COGs and wrote the regulations for them.
And to date, have the only approved regional solid
waste management plan in the state of Texas. It was
a true plan in the sense of planning. We projected,
we made service areas, we made recommendations
for each area. It was extremely well received. And
I believe that's because this was a local problem,
identified locally, involved elected officials
and the public very early on in the process.
Financially committed. Committed local money.
And the plan as it emerged was a true plan, but it was
also a plan that understood the local processes.
So, as I said, I've seen a total evolution. Shortly
after the initial completion of the plan, when we
were just looking into some implementation
actions that the college should take, our
recommendations were three levels. to the state,
a level of regional recommendations with the
largely additional studies that needed to be
performed, and recommendations to the various
units of government. And in a regional sense, our
service areas were interjurisdictional. We
totally ignored jurisdictional lines because
the concept was that cities and counties have to
work together in this area. And we made
recommendations to each area. as we were
beginning to proceed with implementing the
regional portion of this, and I might add that
there have been quite a number of local actions on
the part of Houston as well as some of the
surrounding areas since the adoption of the plan
towards implementing it. At any rate... Who
adopted the plan? The HSE Board of Directors, and
then they sent it through all the mechanisms, and
it was approved by the state of Texas and the
Department of Health. Did the local units of
government... We didn't ask them to individually
adopt the plan. And some of it was because the
nature of the state legislation, you couldn't use
one of our service areas for a local planning
effort, because the local planning effort had to
be only a jurisdiction. You know what sometimes
happens where a law is so specific as to defeat its
own purpose. At any rate, shortly after its
completion, and in fact, week that HGAC was
honored locally for winning a planning award from
Texas APA for the plan, the announcement was made
that the comptroller at HGAC had embezzled just
about all of the agency's money, which started a
new phase for the Regional Council and that was Oh,
I guess a little less than a year and a half ago. What
was the month and date on that? It was December 1985
that it was discovered. And what was discovered
was that it had gone back over a period of seven
years. And it was probably the final number, which
will never be known, was probably close to $2
million. We did better than that a day back. We had a
$3.5 million loss. Did you have FBI agents in your
office the next morning? We had them around the
agency. No one ever came to my office, so I never
even knew what they looked like. As it turned out,
it was not federal funds that were involved,
except for a very, very small amount. But the money
was all pulled out using the administrative
charges or indirect.
all wound up being local money, which was just
about all the money the COG had that they could
spend in any discretionary way. As a result of
that, any programs using local funding were
automatically cut out of the budget. The COG had to
borrow $800,000 just to survive. And so any local
money that was coming in from dues and from the
state was then used towards retiring the debt. And
that effectively... Well, most of your programs
did require local matching funds. Well, there was
enough money set aside for matches. But the
department that I had kind of created, which was
really a true planning department, had very
little outside funding. We received a water
quality planning grant from the state very small
community development grant, $25,000 to
$30,000. And I guess as much as $300,000 a year,
maybe a little more, was local money that was being
used to support innovative programs. We
developed a regional information service with a
very nice demographics program, which not only
served the local governments, but served the
private sector as well. We were doing just a broad
range of programs that were being funded locally.
Well, all that money was effectively gone.
As you know... What happened to him? Well, he pled
guilty to over a million dollars theft, and he is
now in federal prison. Along with... What was his
name? Bill Prince. One of his staff spent six
months in federal prison. Another member of the
administration was indicted and pled guilty and
got probation, several others on whom it was
thought that charges would be filed. Charges just
weren't filed. I believe that the US Attorney's
Office gave immunity in return for information.
But that was not. It took, as you can imagine, the
better part of a year till the legal aspects of that
were put away. And then the COG got very involved
preparing lawsuits against the bank that cashed
hundreds of thousand dollars in forged checks.
And the auditor, who was the auditor for the prior
four years, and told the board of directors at
their last report how proud they should be of how
well managed the money was. So that took a lot of
attention. Who was the auditing firm? Ernst &
Winning, one of the big eight firms. At any rate,
waited for some of that to die down. And of course,
any of the staff could not very well leave the
agency until all investigation was complete. But
it became obvious that we had come full circle. And
the programs for the next, I would say, at least
five years will be the very basic programs that
have outside funding. And there wouldn't be an
opportunity in the near term for the kinds of
innovative or true planning work that we were
doing. So as you know three months ago I tendered my
resignation and am now operating as an
independent consultant.
I'm sure that affected the careers of quite a few
people in terms of shifts or new opportunities and
possibly a shift in terms of as you've already
suggested, the centers of activity of the
professional staff. I think, too, although my
department was most profoundly affected
financially, and we immediately, within the
course of the year, lost three positions, and a
fourth one was jeopardized, and that was at the
staff of eight or nine. But it affected others in
that the transportation manager, who was a and has
a national reputation, had only been there two
years, left over a controversial issue in a plan.
The COG was in a position, in my opinion, where it
couldn't handle any more controversy. Couldn't
handle headlines. There had been a real loss of
credibility. And whereas before the scandal,
they would have taken on the issue and stood up for
what you know, they felt was the proper planning
perspective. I think at the time, they just
couldn't do that. I can understand that, because
the executive committee of our general assembly
decided that after the theft of the $3.5 million by
our Tom Cruax, that they had to take things easy and
were unwilling to become involved in any kind of
innovative programs whatsoever, and sort of
relaxed in the position of being kind of a
information center for the region. Well, there
seems to me to be a concern about taking on anything
controversial. And there isn't even money to be an
information center, because that was being
locally funded. So I don't know what there's going
to be now the best funded program at the COG is the
Jobs Training Partnership Act. And though it's
being administered by a COG, it isn't a planning
program in any sense of the word. So I see the agency
moving a lot more towards direct service,
provision of service type programs, and away from
planning. Interestingly, when they advertised
the job, one of the qualifications as far as
education was, a degree in planning or a number of
things, or a degree in business. So it's a totally
different perspective now, I believe. Then it
makes one wonder about the future of regional
planning in Texas. Yes, that's true because there
are 24 councils of government in Texas. The state
is quite supportive of them. I mean, it's
legislated. The boundaries are legislated. The
state provides a planning grant each year. But
there are problems in many of them. They're either
not well enough funded or politically they're not
well enough accepted. Or they lack professional
leadership. There are not a whole lot of
professional planners in the regional planning
agencies. Now when I left, I had been for several
years the only member of AICP that was on the staff.
Shortly before I left, I did hire another
certified planner. Who was that? Jeff Table. And
he's now, as far as I know, the only member of AICP on
the staff. One of my former students. That's
right, and a very fine young
player. Is he AICP now? Good for him. Well, North
Central Texas Cog has a good reputation. Yes, and
they do some good work, and they're well-funded. I
think one of the differences is my perception is
that they are not quite as political. They work a
lot more with, say, the city managers where we
worked with the mayors. And I think that makes a
difference, so that they're able to stay more in
the technical arena, where we were more in the
political arena. However, we probably make
bigger strides in forming public policy. They
have a very well-organized
police training. Yes, HGAC does that as well. Do
they? But to me, that's, again, a kind of a service
function rather than a planning function. And it
worries me when we talk about the shift of
activities of councils of government away from
planning. to providing service activities,
which tend, in my mind, to become nothing more than
busy work. Well, it's different. It's
administration. And that's not what planning is.
Unfortunately, in this country, in the late
1980s, planning is still, as a profession, not
proven itself in some way. And when there isn't
federal support for planning, which there hasn't
been for quite some years now. Since Nixon.
Exactly. You're unlikely to see the kinds of good
planning that we used to see. It still tends to be a
way of justifying for a government to do what
they're going to do anyway. It tends to take place
not by planners, I've been, since I've been in
private practice, interested that every
engineer calls themselves a planner. Every
economist calls themselves a planner. I don't
call myself an economist or an engineer. Well, if
planning is so unpopular politically, I think
it's all the more remarkable that they
do so. That engineers and architects always seem
to call themselves planners. Because everyone
acknowledges there's a component that has to be
the plan, but that's because you need that
component to justify spending a lot of money on
capital improvements, rather than before you
think of spending the money, you know that you have
to think this through and what it's going to mean to
the future and what's needed and where it's
needed. There's a tendency for everyone to think
that they can do that. It makes me wonder, too,
if... The members of APA, as we now know it, are
going to continue to push for registration of the
title and practice of planning as being a
professional activity rather than considering
planning in its generic form. I haven't heard a
whole lot about that in recent years, but I would
like certainly to see it. All anyone seems to need
to do to be a planner is to go to a few meetings.
Interestingly, you know, I was in China last fall
as part of a delegation of urban planners, and the
thing that struck me the most about the difference
in planning was we presented oh, the
environmental review process, and how you go
about historic preservation from a process
perspective, an economic development process.
And they presented projects to us. And I think
we're always fighting. We feel that we've evolved
into a process, which is what true planning is. And
yet, that seems to still be the battle. Is planning
something you do to allow a project to continue? Or
is it an ongoing process that helps you to deal with
all the issues of an urban society.
How do you feel we've evolved in which one of those
ways? Well, I think that we view it, planners see
the process and seem to understand this as an
ongoing process and it doesn't shock them that you
have to update your forecast annually. A lot of the
politicians and a lot of public service people in
other areas still see it as the project. develop a
new water source, you're going to have to have
something you call the plan that says, do it. Yeah,
you're saying that planters really have learned
how to deal with change. I think they have, but I
don't think they've instructed the others or the
public. Well, of course, this used to be the role of
ASPO before we amalgamated with them and to try to
educate the lay planters. And this is one of the
reasons that I felt it was important in 1970 to have
a short course for planning commissioners, which
then, a few years later, I felt we should expand to
public officials. And that, I think, has done some
good in Texas. It has. And I think what you just said
is what's significant. Planning officials
sometimes understand, but it's the other public
officials. Your public works director doesn't
understand. No. And the elected officials? No,
they don't. It's not politically comfortable,
because one of the reasons solid waste is such an
issue is that it's an issue that requires
long-range planning. It takes many years to
implement a proper solid waste project. It isn't
politically feasible for anyone that's elected
to office to bring up the subject. And no one, well,
I won't say no one, very few are willing to put their
careers on the line for a project that isn't going
to be up and running for 10 or 20 years. And so they
avoid the issue. And yes, they avoid the issue. And
frequently, there were hearings on the community
development program for small cities. One of the
commissioners who has since resigned, but didn't
run again from Harris County, testified. And he
said, Harris County is not eligible for this
program. We're an entitlement community. But I
want to encourage having this program and doing,
you know, giving the money out on a regional basis
because, he says, I have to recognize as a
commissioner in Harris County that it's because
of Houston and Harris County that many of these
small communities are having the problems
they're having. our enormous growth has spread
these problems, and it's incumbent on us to at
least support any way that they can have relief
from these problems. And that was a very
forward-thinking view, but he was, not by
profession, he's a political scientist, but he
understood what you try to do with planning. Sure,
sure. Well, Doris, thanks very much for your
inputs, and you'll be getting a transcription to
review and comment on so you'll have your chance
then to add anything or make any corrections that
are needed. Well, I enjoyed it. I hope it didn't end
my career. Thank you.